# Building blocks of linear logic

The previous episode ended with a brief introduction to basic building blocks of linear logic, in particular, the ones that would allow creating compound statements from the smaller ones. In this episode, we shall have a closer look at them.

## Negation 

Negation allows considering the *not form* of a statement, hence in a sense, its the dual of a statement.  However, the *not form* does not mean the exact opposite. For example, the negation of a statement such as *to spend a dollar* will be *to receive a dollar*. (In general, it is not *not spending a dollar*). 

The symbol for negation is $A^\perp$ (here, $\perp$ read as *perp*) for any statement $A$.

Negation is an **involution** ; this means that double negation = no negation, $(A^\perp)^\perp = A$.  One may think of it this way: for all practical purposes, to receive a dollar first and then to spend the received dollar to buy an apple is same as just spending a dollar to buy an apple. Either way, a dollar has been converted to an apple. 

## Multiplicatives

The four connectives $\otimes$, $1$, &#8523;, and $\bot$ are called the **multiplicatives**. Multiplicatives allow simultaneous access to two or more resources. 

Linearly distributive categories is the sub-logic generated by the multiplicatives presented in the language of category theory. This sub-logic is referred to in the literature as the "full multiplicative linear logic". Star autonomous categories is the sub-logic of the multiplicatives and the negation. 

::: tip Dear Reader,
I would not be using &#8523; symbol anymore in this series, and have happily replaced it by $\oplus$. I have also replaced $1$ by $\top$, following the convention set in the original paper on [*linearly distributive categories*](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0022404995001603) (1997) by Cockett and Seely.

To all the critics of this change in notation, Cockett and Seely wrote in their [*sequel*](https://www.math.mcgill.ca/rags/linear/linmorph.pdf) paper (1999), *"More controversial perhaps is our insistence upon the use of
$\oplus$ for 'par' and $+$ for the coproduct 'sum'. As category theorists we are unrepentant
upon this point, and there the matter must rest."*

:::

Let us see what these connectives mean intiutively. A statement, $A \otimes B$ (read as A *tensor* B) allows the resources $A$ and $B$ to be available at the same time.  For example, consider the following statements:

$$
\begin{align*}
p &: \text{ a dollar }  \\
q &: \text{ an apple } \\
r &: \text{ an orange } 
\end{align*}
$$

Then, $p \Rightarrow q \otimes r$ refers to the fact that a dollar :dollar: buys an apple :apple: **and** an orange :orange: at the same time.  

The connective $\top$ (read as *top*) which is the multiplicative truth is the unit of the tensor.  Hence, $A \otimes \top = \top \otimes A = A$ (multiplying $1$ with a number gives back the number). 

The connective $\bot$ (read as *bot*) is the multiplicative false. $\top$ and $\bot$ are duals to one another, that is, $\top^\perp = \bot$. The connective, $\oplus$ (read as the *par*) is dual to the tensor.  This means that, $(A^\perp \otimes B^\perp)^\perp = A \oplus B$. A intuitive interpretation of the par is more subtle. It is better understood when have an multiplicatives interpreted in a specific system. 

Linearly distributive categories are the framework where the interplay of the tensor and the par along with their units is explained without the use of negation.

## Exponentials

Exponentials allow for non-linear operations within the logic. Instead of one resource becoming the other exponentials allow resources to reproduce (without any check) and to disappear!  

An **infinte storage** of apples is written as $!$:apple: (pronounced *bang* an apple, or *of course* an apple). From this storage, one can extract an apples any number of times. The storage of a resource itself can produce another copy of itself or can vanish in thin air! In category theory, these are modelled using coalgebra modalities (TODO: put link here) and have deep connection to differential categories (TODO: put link here).

There is another exponential modality, who is an **(ever) hungry pacman**. A $?$:apple: (pronounced *whimper* an apple, or *why not* an apple) is an ever-hungry hungry pacman for apple resource. Two such hungry pacmans can combine into one or can produce themselves out of thin air. 

Negation puts the infinite storage and the hungry pacman on the same pedestal: negating a hungry pacman for apples gives an infinite storage of negated apples (whatever that means!). 

$$ (?p)^\perp = !(p^\perp) $$

**Fun fact:** The term *whimper* was coined by [Richard (Rick) Blute](https://richardblute.ca/) from University of Ottawa, one of the pioneers of linearly distributive categories. 

## Additives

I am going to skip these for now since they would not be reappearing on the stage in the immediate future.

In the [next episode](/chapter1/Semantics.md), we shall see how a wide range of categories from linearly distributive to monoidal, are simply the multiplicative fragment of linear logic with different constraints placed on the interplay of the tensor and the par! :tada:
